# MLB-Predict-Playoff-Status-in-Modern-Era-Baseball
Statistical & Machine Learning to Predict Season Wins & Playoff Status for MLB teams using baseball statistics (ERA, HR, etc.)

# Metadata
Name: Victor Teelucksingh
Project Name: Predicting MLB Team Win Percent and Playoff Status in the Modern Baseball Era

# Executive Summary (See HTML for full report)
This project explored the ability to predict a Major League Baseball (MLB) team’s win percentage and playoff status using baseball stats from 1997 through 2016 from the Lahman Baseball Database. This group intended to focus, in particular, on variables that a team owner or manager could have some level of influence over, either by offensive strategy decisions, defensive strategy decisions, player stats to focus on when making signing decisions, or other intentional strategies. The intention was to create predictive models for use in real-world decision-making scenarios for team managers and owners to improve outcomes. Right from the beginning, the objectives of this group may seem similar to those outlined in Michael Lewis’ renowned book, Moneyball. However, the group delved further into the subject matter, expanding the focus to identify other crucial variables that could inform team owners’ and managers’ decisions and improve outcomes.

The Lahman Baseball database contains several team and player statistics across MLB seasons from 1871 to 2021. In our work, we pre-processed, then combined several tables from the database, including Teams, Salaries, and SeriesPost tables, to create a final dataframe with several useful variables. While exploring the datasets, this working group inspected, calculated, and combined these variables to create useful predictors in a single dataframe.

The group’s first question of interest explored which team stats are the most useful for accurately predicting a team’s winning percentage for the seasons spanning 1997 to 2016. Starting with exploratory data analysis using data visualizations, this working group began to form hypotheses, then put these to the test by constructing and testing a high-performing linear regression model.

In summary, the variables that were both influential and statistically significant enough to make it into our predictive model were (in order of influence) fielding percentage, on-base percentage, steal percentage, saves, home runs allowed, home runs, walks allowed, outs pitched, strikeouts by pitchers, and strikeouts by batters. On-base percentage and field percentage stand out as the most influential predictors. For every percentage point increase in OBP, the team’s win percentage increases by an estimated 1.95%, and for every percentage point increase in field percentage, the team’s win percentage increases by an estimated 2.23%, assuming all other variables remain constant.

The group’s second question of interest explored the ability to successfully predict a team’s ability to make it to the playoffs based on a handful of predictor variables. Again, by starting with analyzing the data with visualizations, the group was able to begin to understand relationships between variables, test hypotheses about those relationships, and eventually create a high-performing logistic regression model. We trained the final model using observations from the 1997 through 2015 seasons, then tested it on data from the 2016 season. It achieved an accuracy of 86.67% in testing.

During this team’s work, we discovered the most powerful predictor for a team making it to the playoffs was the team’s On-base Percentage (OBP) – how frequently a team’s batters reach base per plate appearance. In our research, this group discovered that for every additional percentage point increase in OBP, the estimated odds of that team progressing to the playoffs is multiplied by an estimated 3.49, assuming all other variables remain constant.

Our analysis confirms that both our models meet all necessary statistical criteria for validity. This means that these models are reliable in predicting team success both in win percentage and prediction of playoff appearance because the relationships between the predictor variables and response variables are not simply due to chance or flawed experimentation. Nevertheless, it is important to note the nuances associated with this group’s work.

First, since our data spans the years from 1997 to 2016, these models’ reliability is limited to this time frame, and to use it for analysis outside of this timeframe, one must also consider changes that may occur in the rules of MLB baseball, trending team strategy changes, regulation changes in the sport (and so on) that may have an impact on model performance. The second notable nuance to consider is that one could argue that creating separate and unique observations for each team-year combination potentially violates the independence assumption if, for example, a team were to employ a successful strategy across multiple years. Correcting for this level of nuance falls outside of the scope of this project but is an important characteristic to consider.

Although there are nuances to the models created in our research, this group is confident that these models would be useful to MLB team owners and managers in making trustworthy predictions that would be useful in real-world decision-making scenarios. While it is important to recognize limitations, it is also important to remind ourselves that no model is perfect, and the ability to predict a Major League Baseball (MLB) team’s win percentage and playoff status using known stats can be a powerful tool if taken advantage of properly.